Nirvana was an American rock band formed in Aberdeen Washington in 1987. Founded by lead singer and guitarist Kurt Cobain and bassist Krist Novoselic the band went through a succession of drummers before recruiting Dave Grohl in 1990. Characterized by their punk aesthetic Nirvanas fusion of pop melodies with noise combined with their themes of abjection and social alienation made them hugely popular during their short tenure. Their music maintains a popular following and continues to influence modern rock and roll culture.

In the late 1980s Nirvana established itself as part of the Seattle grunge scene releasing its first album Bleach for the independent record label Sub Pop in 1989. They developed a sound that relied on dynamic contrasts often between quiet verses and loud heavy choruses. After signing to major label DGC Records in 1991 Nirvana found unexpected mainstream success with "Smells Like Teen Spirit" the first single from their landmark second album Nevermind 1991. A cultural phenomenon of the 1990s the album went on to be certified Diamond by the RIAA. Nirvanas sudden success popularized alternative rock and was credited for ending the dominance of hair metal while they were also often referenced as the figurehead band of Generation X.

Following extensive tours and the 1992 compilation album Incesticide and EP Hormoaning Nirvana released their abrasive and less mainstream sounding third studio album In Utero 1993. The album topped both the American and British album charts and was widely acclaimed. Nirvana disbanded following Cobains death in April 1994. Various posthumous releases have been overseen by Novoselic Grohl and Cobains widow Courtney Love. The posthumous live album MTV Unplugged in New York 1994 won Best Alternative Music Performance at the 1996 Grammy Awards.

During their three years as a mainstream act Nirvana received an American Music Award Brit Award and Grammy Award as well as seven MTV Video Music Awards and two NME Awards. By 2009 they had sold over 75 million records worldwide making them one of the bestselling bands of all time. They achieved five numberone hits on the Billboard Alternative Songs chart and four numberone albums on the Billboard 200. In 2004 Rolling Stone named Nirvana among the greatest artists of all time. They were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in their first year of eligibility in 2014. 