Amazon.com Inc. is an American multinational technology company based in Seattle that focuses on e commerce cloud computing digital streaming and artificial intelligence. It is considered one of the Big Four technology companies along with Google Apple and Facebook. It has been referred to as one of the most influential economic and cultural forces in the world as well as the worlds most valuable brand.

Amazon is known for its disruption of well established industries through technological innovation and mass scale. It is the worlds largest online marketplace AI assistant provider live streaming platform and cloud computing platform as measured by revenue and market capitalization. Amazon is the largest Internet company by revenue in the world. It is the second largest private employer in the United States and one of the worlds most valuable companies.

Amazon was founded by Jeff Bezos in Bellevue Washington on July 5 1994. The company started as an online marketplace for books but expanded to sell electronics software video games apparel furniture food toys and jewelry. In 2015 Amazon surpassed Walmart as the most valuable retailer in the United States by market capitalization. In 2017 Amazon acquired Whole Foods Market for 13 billion dollars substantially increasing Amazons footprint as a physical retailer. In 2018 Bezos announced that its two day delivery service Amazon Prime had surpassed 100 million subscribers worldwide.

Amazon distributes downloads and streaming of video music and audiobooks through its Prime Video Amazon Music Twitch and Audible subsidiaries. Amazon also has a publishing arm Amazon Publishing a film and television studio Amazon Studios and a cloud computing subsidiary Amazon Web Services. It produces consumer electronics including Kindle e readers Fire tablets Fire TV and Echo devices. In addition Amazon acquisitions include Ring Twitch Whole Foods Market and IMDb. Among various controversies the company has been criticized for technological surveillance overreach a hyper competitive and demanding work culture tax avoidance and anti competitive practices.