Netflix Inc. is an American technology and media services provider and production company headquartered in Los Gatos California founded in 1997 by Reed Hastings and Marc Randolph in Scotts Valley California. The companys primary business is its subscription based streaming service which offers online streaming of a library of films and television series including those produced in house. As of April 2020 Netflix had over 193 million paid subscriptions worldwide including 73 million in the United States. It is available worldwide except in the following mainland China due to local restrictions Syria North Korea and Crimea due to US sanctions. The company also has offices in France United States United Kingdom Brazil the Netherlands India Japan and South Korea. Netflix is a member of the Motion Picture Association MPA. Today the company produces and distributes content from countries all over the globe.

Netflixs initial business model included DVD sales and rental by mail but Hastings abandoned the sales about a year after the companys founding to focus on the initial DVD rental business. Netflix expanded its business in 2007 with the introduction of streaming media while retaining the DVD and Blu ray rental business. The company expanded internationally in 2010 with streaming available in Canada followed by Latin America and the Caribbean. Netflix entered the content production industry in 2013 debuting its first series House of Cards.

Since 2012 Netflix has taken more of an active role as producer and distributor for both film and television series and to that end it offers a variety of Netflix Original content through its online library. By January 2016 Netflix services operated in more than 190 countries. Netflix released an estimated 126 original series and films in 2016 more than any other network or cable channel. Their efforts to produce new content secure the rights for additional content and diversify through 190 countries have resulted in the company racking up billions in debt 22 billion dollars as of September 2017 up from 17 billion dollars from the previous year. 7 billion dollars of this is long term debt while the remaining is in long term obligations. In October 2018 Netflix announced it would raise another 2 billion dollars in debt to help fund new content. On July 10 2020 Netflix became the largest entertainment media company by market cap.