OneRepublic is an American pop rock band formed in Colorado Springs Colorado in 2002. It consists of lead vocalist and multi instrumentalist Ryan Tedder guitarist Zach Filkins guitarist Drew Brown bassist and cellist Brent Kutzle drummer Eddie Fisher and keyboardist Brian Willett. The band first achieved commercial success on Myspace as an unsigned act. In late 2002 after OneRepublic played shows throughout the Los Angeles area several record labels approached the band with interest but the band ultimately signed with Velvet Hammer an imprint of Columbia Records. They made their first album with producer Greg Wells during the summer and fall of 2005 at his studio Rocket Carousel in Culver City California. The album was originally scheduled for release on June 6 2006 but the group was dropped by Columbia two months before the album came out. The lead single of that album Apologize was released on April 30 2006 on Myspace and received some recognition there becoming number one on the Myspace charts.

In 2007 OneRepublic released their debut album Dreaming Out Loud. Its lead single Apologize was remixed by Timbaland becoming a huge international success reaching number one in sixteen countries and subsequently earning them a Grammy Award nomination. The second single Stop and Stare mirrored its predecessors success. The album was later certified Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America RIAA. The bands second album Waking Up 2009 produced the singles All the Right Moves Secrets Marchin On and Good Life with the latter reaching the top ten of the US Billboard Hot 100.

OneRepublics third album Native 2013 became the bands first top ten album on the Billboard 200 and highest charting album to date charting at number four. The lead single If I Lose Myself charted within the top ten in several countries while the albums third single Counting Stars became the bands most successful single in recent years obtaining top five placements in Australia Canada Germany Ireland New Zealand the U.S. and the UK. This marks their highest charting single in the United Kingdom to date. It has also peaked at number 2 on the US Billboard Hot 100 matching their highest peak of Apologize in 2007. 